README.md, before:

# caddy-auth-jwt

<a href="https://github.com/greenpau/caddy-auth-jwt/actions/" target="_blank"><img src="https://github.com/greenpau/caddy-auth-jwt/workflows/build/badge.svg?branch=main"></a>
<a href="https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/greenpau/caddy-auth-jwt" target="_blank"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/godoc-reference-blue.svg"></a>
<a href="https://caddy.community" target="_blank"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/community-forum-ff69b4.svg"></a>

JWT Authorization Plugin for [Caddy v2](https://github.com/caddyserver/caddy).

This work is inspired by [BTBurke/caddy-jwt](https://github.com/BTBurke/caddy-jwt).
Many thanks to @BTBurke and other contributors for the plugin

<!-- begin-markdown-toc -->
## Table of Contents

* [Ask Questions](#ask-questions)
* [Overview](#overview)
* [Limitations](#limitations)
* [Plugin Users](#plugin-users)
  * [Getting Started](#getting-started)
    * [JSON Configuration](#json-configuration)
    * [Caddyfile](#caddyfile)
* [Plugin Developers](#plugin-developers)
* [Role-based Access Control and Access Lists](#role-based-access-control-and-access-lists)
  * [Sources of Role Information](#sources-of-role-information)
  * [Anonymous Role](#anonymous-role)
  * [Granting Access with Access Lists](#granting-access-with-access-lists)

<!-- end-markdown-toc -->

## Ask Questions

Please ask questions and I will help you!

## Overview

With Caddy v2 modules (aka plugins), there is a shift in how one builds a plugin.
If a plugin is being used in multiple parts of a configuration, e.g. in different
routes, each part of the configuration initializes (provisions and validates) a
new instance of the plugin.

For example, this authorization plugin may be used to protect multiple routes.
It means that each of the routes will get its own instance of the plugin.

**How does configuration in one part affects other parts?**

* By default, a single instance of a plugin inherits "default" context.
* All instances of the plugin in an authorization context (e.g. "default"
  authorization context) inherit settings from the **primary** instance in
  the authorization context.
* There is only one **primary** instance in an authorization context.
* A plugin MUST have a **primary** instance in an authorization context.
* If an instance is not a **primary** instance, and a particular configuration
  property is not being set, then the instance inherits the property from the
  **primary** instance.

**What happens when a plugin does not have access list**

* If an instance of a plugin does not have an access list, it inherits the
  configuration from the **primary** instance in its authorization context.
* If a **primary** instance does not have an access list, the instances without
  an access list allow access for the holders of **anonymous** and **guest**
  claims.

## Limitations

Currently, the plugin implements limited set of features. As such the following
is still under development:

* `strip_token`
* `pass_claims`
* `token_types`: only HS algo at the moment.

## Plugin Users

### Getting Started

#### JSON Configuration

This repository contains a sample configuration (see `assets/conf/config.json`).

My application is a reverse proxy for Prometheus and Alertmanager instances.
I want to allow access to the instances to the holders of **anonymous** and **guest**
claims.

The Alertmanager route is as follows. The instance of the plugin is NOT
a **primary** instance. The configuration is only an access list.

Since the context is not specified, this instance is in "default" authorization
context.

```json
            {
              "handle": [
                {
                  "handler": "authentication",
                  "providers": {
                    "jwt": {
                      "access_list": [
                        {
                          "action": "allow",
                          "claim": "roles",
                          "values": [
                            "anonymous",
                            "guest",
                            "admin"
                          ]
                        }
                      ]
                    }
                  }
                },
                {
                  "body": "alertmanager",
                  "handler": "static_response",
                  "status_code": 200
                }
              ],
              "match": [
                {
                  "path": [
                    "/alertmanager"
                  ]
                }
              ],
              "terminal": true
            },
```

Next, notice that Prometheus route the the **primary** in its authorization
context. It has the default setting for the context.

```json
            {
              "handle": [
                {
                  "handler": "authentication",
                  "providers": {
                    "jwt": {
                      "primary": true,
                      "token_name": "access_token",
                      "token_secret": "383aca9a-1c39-4d7a-b4d8-67ba4718dd3f",
                      "token_issuer": "7a50e023-2c6e-4a5e-913e-23ecd0e2b940",
                      "auth_url_path": "/auth",
                      "access_list": [
                        {
                          "action": "allow",
                          "claim": "roles",
                          "values": [
                            "anonymous",
                            "guest",
                            "admin"
                          ]
                        }
                      ],
                      "strip_token": false,
                      "pass_claims": false,
                      "token_types": [
                        "HS256",
                        "HS384",
                        "HS512"
                      ],
                      "token_sources": [
                        "header",
                        "cookie",
                        "query"
                      ]
                    }
                  }
                },
                {
                  "body": "prometheus",
                  "handler": "static_response",
                  "status_code": 200
                }
              ],
              "match": [
                {
                  "path": [
                    "/prometheus"
                  ]
                }
              ],
              "terminal": true
            },
```

The `primary` indicates that the instance is the primary instance in its
authorization context.

The `token_sources` configures where the plugin looks for an authorization
token. By default, it looks in Authorization header, cookies, and query
parameters.

The `token_name` indicates the name of the token in the `token_sources`. By
default, it allows `jwt_access_token` and `access_token`.

The `token_secret` is the password for symmetric algorithms. If the secret
is not provided in the configuration, it can be passed via environment
variable `JWT_TOKEN_SECRET`.

The `auth_url_path` is the URL a user gets redirected to when a token is
invalid.

The `access_list` is the series of entries defining how to authorize claims.
In the above example, the plugin authorizes access for the holders of "roles"
claim where values are any of the following: "anonymous", "guest", "admin".

#### Caddyfile

The following `Caddyfile` configuration mirrors closely the above JSON
configuration. 

```
{
  http_port 8080
  https_port 8443
  debug
}

localhost:8443 {
  route /prometheus* {
    jwt {
      primary yes
      trusted_tokens {
        static_secret {
          token_name access_token
          token_secret 383aca9a-1c39-4d7a-b4d8-67ba4718dd3f
          token_issuer 7a50e023-2c6e-4a5e-913e-23ecd0e2b940
        }
      }
      auth_url /auth
      allow roles anonymous guest admin
    }
    respond * "prometheus" 200
  }

  route /alertmanager* {
    jwt
    respond * "alertmanager" 200
  }

  route /auth* {
    respond * "auth portal" 200
  }

  route /version* {
    respond * "1.0.0" 200
  }

  route {
    redir https://{hostport}/auth 302
  }
}
```

Please note that the `jwt` directive instucts the instance of the
plugin to inherit all of its properties from the `primary` instance.
This greatly simplifies the configuration.

```
route /alertmanager* {
  jwt
  respond * "alertmanager" 200
}
```

## Plugin Developers

This section of the documentation targets a plugin developer who wants to issue
JWT tokens as part of their plugin.

Please see [caddy-auth-portal](https://github.com/greenpau/caddy-auth-portal/blob/0bc10a3de90f63d44a6617ccbd284c2d23f73e39/pkg/backends/local/backend.go#L26)
for an example how to issue JWT tokens.

First, a developer would need to create `TokenProviderConfig` object via
`NewTokenProviderConfig()`.

```
tokenProvider := jwt.NewTokenProviderConfig()
```

Second, set the `TokenProviderConfig`
[properties](https://github.com/greenpau/caddy-auth-portal/blob/0bc10a3de90f63d44a6617ccbd284c2d23f73e39/pkg/backends/local/backend.go#L274-L297), e.g.:

* `TokenName`
* `TokenIssuer`
* `TokenOrigin`
* `TokenLifetime`

Next, create a claim:

```go
    claims := &jwt.UserClaims{}
    claims.Subject = username
    claims.Email = username
    claims.Name = "Smith, John"
    claims.Roles = append(claims.Roles, "anonymous")
    claims.Roles = append(claims.Roles, "guest")
    claims.Origin = tokenProvider.TokenOrigin
    claims.ExpiresAt = time.Now().Add(time.Duration(tokenProvider.TokenLifetime) * time.Second).Unix()
```

Finally, having created claims, the developer can create a token string:

```go
userToken, err := claims.GetToken("HS512", []byte(m.TokenProvider.TokenSecret))
```

## Role-based Access Control and Access Lists

### Sources of Role Information

By default, the plugin finds role information in the following token fields:

* `roles`
* `role`
* `group`
* `groups`
* `app_metadata` - `authorization` - `roles`

In the below example, the use has a single role, i.e. `anonymous`.

```json
{
  "exp": 1596031874,
  "sub": "jsmith",
  "name": "Smith, John",
  "email": "jsmith@gmail.com",
  "roles": [
    "anonymous"
  ],
  "origin": "localhost"
}
```

Additionally, the token validation component of the plugin recognized that roles
may be in other parts of a token, e.g. `app_metadata - authorization - roles`:

```json
{
  "app_metadata": {
    "authorization": {
      "roles": ["admin", "editor"]
    }
  }
}
```

References:

* [Auth0 Docs - App Metadata](https://auth0.com/docs/users/concepts/overview-user-metadata)
* [Netlify - Role-based access control with JWT - External providers](https://docs.netlify.com/visitor-access/role-based-access-control/#external-providers)

### Anonymous Role

By default, if the plugin does not find role information in JWT token, then
automatically treats the token having the following two roles:

* `anonymous`
* `guest`

For example, it happens when:
* `roles` and `app_metadata` are not present in a token
* `app_metadata` does not contain `authorization`

### Granting Access with Access Lists

The authorization in the context of Caddy v2 is being processed by
an authentication handler, e.g. this plugin. The following snippet
is a configuration of one instance of the plugin (handler).

```json
{
  "handler": "authentication",
  "providers": {
    "jwt": {
      "access_list": [
        {
          "action": "allow",
          "claim": "roles",
          "values": [
            "anonymous",
            "guest",
            "admin"
          ]
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

The `access_list` data structure contains a list of entries.

Each of the entries must have the following fields:
* `action`: `allow` or `deny`
* `claim`: currently the only allowed value is `roles`. The future plan for this
  field is the introduction of regular expressions to match various token fields
* `value`: it could be the name of a role or `*` for any. The future plan for this
  field is the introduction of regular expressions to match role names

By default, if a plugin instance is primary and `access_list` key does not exist
in its configuration, the instance creates a default "allow" entry. The entry
grants access to `anonymous` and `guest` roles.

If there an entry with a matching claim and the action associated with the entry
is `deny`, then the claim is not allowed. This deny takes precedence over any
other matching `allow`.

The "catch-all" action is `deny`.

Commit message:

small change to allow to redirect to current dir

README.md, after:

# caddy-auth-jwt

<a href="https://github.com/greenpau/caddy-auth-jwt/actions/" target="_blank"><img src="https://github.com/greenpau/caddy-auth-jwt/workflows/build/badge.svg?branch=main"></a>
<a href="https://pkg.go.dev/github.com/greenpau/caddy-auth-jwt" target="_blank"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/godoc-reference-blue.svg"></a>
<a href="https://caddy.community" target="_blank"><img src="https://img.shields.io/badge/community-forum-ff69b4.svg"></a>

JWT Authorization Plugin for [Caddy v2](https://github.com/caddyserver/caddy).

This work is inspired by [BTBurke/caddy-jwt](https://github.com/BTBurke/caddy-jwt).
Many thanks to @BTBurke and other contributors for the plugin

<!-- begin-markdown-toc -->
## Table of Contents

* [Ask Questions](#ask-questions)
* [Overview](#overview)
* [Limitations](#limitations)
* [Plugin Users](#plugin-users)
  * [Getting Started](#getting-started)
    * [JSON Configuration](#json-configuration)
    * [Caddyfile](#caddyfile)
* [Plugin Developers](#plugin-developers)
* [Role-based Access Control and Access Lists](#role-based-access-control-and-access-lists)
  * [Sources of Role Information](#sources-of-role-information)
  * [Anonymous Role](#anonymous-role)
  * [Granting Access with Access Lists](#granting-access-with-access-lists)

<!-- end-markdown-toc -->

## Ask Questions

Please ask questions and I will help you!

## Overview

With Caddy v2 modules (aka plugins), there is a shift in how one builds a plugin.
If a plugin is being used in multiple parts of a configuration, e.g. in different
routes, each part of the configuration initializes (provisions and validates) a
new instance of the plugin.

For example, this authorization plugin may be used to protect multiple routes.
It means that each of the routes will get its own instance of the plugin.

**How does configuration in one part affects other parts?**

* By default, a single instance of a plugin inherits "default" context.
* All instances of the plugin in an authorization context (e.g. "default"
  authorization context) inherit settings from the **primary** instance in
  the authorization context.
* There is only one **primary** instance in an authorization context.
* A plugin MUST have a **primary** instance in an authorization context.
* If an instance is not a **primary** instance, and a particular configuration
  property is not being set, then the instance inherits the property from the
  **primary** instance.

**What happens when a plugin does not have access list**

* If an instance of a plugin does not have an access list, it inherits the
  configuration from the **primary** instance in its authorization context.
* If a **primary** instance does not have an access list, the instances without
  an access list allow access for the holders of **anonymous** and **guest**
  claims.

## Limitations

Currently, the plugin implements limited set of features. As such the following
is still under development:

* `strip_token`
* `pass_claims`
* `token_types`: only HS algo at the moment.

## Plugin Users

### Getting Started

#### JSON Configuration

This repository contains a sample configuration (see `assets/conf/config.json`).

My application is a reverse proxy for Prometheus and Alertmanager instances.
I want to allow access to the instances to the holders of **anonymous** and **guest**
claims.

The Alertmanager route is as follows. The instance of the plugin is NOT
a **primary** instance. The configuration is only an access list.

Since the context is not specified, this instance is in "default" authorization
context.

```json
            {
              "handle": [
                {
                  "handler": "authentication",
                  "providers": {
                    "jwt": {
                      "access_list": [
                        {
                          "action": "allow",
                          "claim": "roles",
                          "values": [
                            "anonymous",
                            "guest",
                            "admin"
                          ]
                        }
                      ]
                    }
                  }
                },
                {
                  "body": "alertmanager",
                  "handler": "static_response",
                  "status_code": 200
                }
              ],
              "match": [
                {
                  "path": [
                    "/alertmanager"
                  ]
                }
              ],
              "terminal": true
            },
```

Next, notice that Prometheus route the the **primary** in its authorization
context. It has the default setting for the context.

```json
            {
              "handle": [
                {
                  "handler": "authentication",
                  "providers": {
                    "jwt": {
                      "primary": true,
                      "token_name": "access_token",
                      "token_secret": "383aca9a-1c39-4d7a-b4d8-67ba4718dd3f",
                      "token_issuer": "7a50e023-2c6e-4a5e-913e-23ecd0e2b940",
                      "auth_url_path": "/auth",
                      "access_list": [
                        {
                          "action": "allow",
                          "claim": "roles",
                          "values": [
                            "anonymous",
                            "guest",
                            "admin"
                          ]
                        }
                      ],
                      "strip_token": false,
                      "pass_claims": false,
                      "token_types": [
                        "HS256",
                        "HS384",
                        "HS512"
                      ],
                      "token_sources": [
                        "header",
                        "cookie",
                        "query"
                      ]
                    }
                  }
                },
                {
                  "body": "prometheus",
                  "handler": "static_response",
                  "status_code": 200
                }
              ],
              "match": [
                {
                  "path": [
                    "/prometheus"
                  ]
                }
              ],
              "terminal": true
            },
```

The `primary` indicates that the instance is the primary instance in its
authorization context.

The `token_sources` configures where the plugin looks for an authorization
token. By default, it looks in Authorization header, cookies, and query
parameters.

The `token_name` indicates the name of the token in the `token_sources`. By
default, it allows `jwt_access_token` and `access_token`.

The `token_secret` is the password for symmetric algorithms. If the secret
is not provided in the configuration, it can be passed via environment
variable `JWT_TOKEN_SECRET`.

The `auth_url_path` is the URL a user gets redirected to when a token is
invalid.  If the value `CURRENT_URL` is found in the argument it is
replaced with the url of the current request.

The `access_list` is the series of entries defining how to authorize claims.
In the above example, the plugin authorizes access for the holders of "roles"
claim where values are any of the following: "anonymous", "guest", "admin".

#### Caddyfile

The following `Caddyfile` configuration mirrors closely the above JSON
configuration. 

```
{
  http_port 8080
  https_port 8443
  debug
}

localhost:8443 {
  route /prometheus* {
    jwt {
      primary yes
      trusted_tokens {
        static_secret {
          token_name access_token
          token_secret 383aca9a-1c39-4d7a-b4d8-67ba4718dd3f
          token_issuer 7a50e023-2c6e-4a5e-913e-23ecd0e2b940
        }
      }
      auth_url /auth
      allow roles anonymous guest admin
    }
    respond * "prometheus" 200
  }

  route /alertmanager* {
    jwt
    respond * "alertmanager" 200
  }

  route /auth* {
    respond * "auth portal" 200
  }

  route /version* {
    respond * "1.0.0" 200
  }

  route {
    redir https://{hostport}/auth 302
  }
}
```

Please note that the `jwt` directive instucts the instance of the
plugin to inherit all of its properties from the `primary` instance.
This greatly simplifies the configuration.

```
route /alertmanager* {
  jwt
  respond * "alertmanager" 200
}
```

## Plugin Developers

This section of the documentation targets a plugin developer who wants to issue
JWT tokens as part of their plugin.

Please see [caddy-auth-portal](https://github.com/greenpau/caddy-auth-portal/blob/0bc10a3de90f63d44a6617ccbd284c2d23f73e39/pkg/backends/local/backend.go#L26)
for an example how to issue JWT tokens.

First, a developer would need to create `TokenProviderConfig` object via
`NewTokenProviderConfig()`.

```
tokenProvider := jwt.NewTokenProviderConfig()
```

Second, set the `TokenProviderConfig`
[properties](https://github.com/greenpau/caddy-auth-portal/blob/0bc10a3de90f63d44a6617ccbd284c2d23f73e39/pkg/backends/local/backend.go#L274-L297), e.g.:

* `TokenName`
* `TokenIssuer`
* `TokenOrigin`
* `TokenLifetime`

Next, create a claim:

```go
    claims := &jwt.UserClaims{}
    claims.Subject = username
    claims.Email = username
    claims.Name = "Smith, John"
    claims.Roles = append(claims.Roles, "anonymous")
    claims.Roles = append(claims.Roles, "guest")
    claims.Origin = tokenProvider.TokenOrigin
    claims.ExpiresAt = time.Now().Add(time.Duration(tokenProvider.TokenLifetime) * time.Second).Unix()
```

Finally, having created claims, the developer can create a token string:

```go
userToken, err := claims.GetToken("HS512", []byte(m.TokenProvider.TokenSecret))
```

## Role-based Access Control and Access Lists

### Sources of Role Information

By default, the plugin finds role information in the following token fields:

* `roles`
* `role`
* `group`
* `groups`
* `app_metadata` - `authorization` - `roles`

In the below example, the use has a single role, i.e. `anonymous`.

```json
{
  "exp": 1596031874,
  "sub": "jsmith",
  "name": "Smith, John",
  "email": "jsmith@gmail.com",
  "roles": [
    "anonymous"
  ],
  "origin": "localhost"
}
```

Additionally, the token validation component of the plugin recognized that roles
may be in other parts of a token, e.g. `app_metadata - authorization - roles`:

```json
{
  "app_metadata": {
    "authorization": {
      "roles": ["admin", "editor"]
    }
  }
}
```

References:

* [Auth0 Docs - App Metadata](https://auth0.com/docs/users/concepts/overview-user-metadata)
* [Netlify - Role-based access control with JWT - External providers](https://docs.netlify.com/visitor-access/role-based-access-control/#external-providers)

### Anonymous Role

By default, if the plugin does not find role information in JWT token, then
automatically treats the token having the following two roles:

* `anonymous`
* `guest`

For example, it happens when:
* `roles` and `app_metadata` are not present in a token
* `app_metadata` does not contain `authorization`

### Granting Access with Access Lists

The authorization in the context of Caddy v2 is being processed by
an authentication handler, e.g. this plugin. The following snippet
is a configuration of one instance of the plugin (handler).

```json
{
  "handler": "authentication",
  "providers": {
    "jwt": {
      "access_list": [
        {
          "action": "allow",
          "claim": "roles",
          "values": [
            "anonymous",
            "guest",
            "admin"
          ]
        }
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

The `access_list` data structure contains a list of entries.

Each of the entries must have the following fields:
* `action`: `allow` or `deny`
* `claim`: currently the only allowed value is `roles`. The future plan for this
  field is the introduction of regular expressions to match various token fields
* `value`: it could be the name of a role or `*` for any. The future plan for this
  field is the introduction of regular expressions to match role names

By default, if a plugin instance is primary and `access_list` key does not exist
in its configuration, the instance creates a default "allow" entry. The entry
grants access to `anonymous` and `guest` roles.

If there an entry with a matching claim and the action associated with the entry
is `deny`, then the claim is not allowed. This deny takes precedence over any
other matching `allow`.

The "catch-all" action is `deny`.
